you're the only person on Earth that
followed Steve Jobs and Elon Musk for
years and years so what did you learn
this is going to be a fun ride Walter
Ison one of the greatest biography
writers ever whose work allows all of us
to learn from some of the greatest Minds
in history and all the people I've
written about who are disruptors they
tend to have had demons driving them but
for Elon Musk it was particularly brutal
a scrawny kid on the autism spectrum no
friends beaten up quite often but the
scars from that were minor compared to
what happened when he went home it took
traveling around with Elon for 2 years
morning noon and night before I could
get him to open up about his father and
then it started coming out everything
from his hardwiring to a psychologically
abusive father helped make somebody
who's addicted to drama he was at
Twitter headquarters he decides they
should get rid of one of the server
farms and the engineers say we can't do
it fire s and then Christmas Eve Elon
forces his way into the server facility
with a set of wire cutters and cuts the
cable to the server it drove the teams
crazy but it drove them to do things
they didn't think they could do because
must spends 80% of his hardcore mental
energy on but is he
happy how did Steve Jobs change you when
he was dying I was in his backyard with
him and he says I regret
imagine that you could follow Steve Jobs
and Elon Musk for years and years and
years and years imagine what you would
learn imagine what you would see imagine
the value that you would take from that
experience of following two of the
greatest World shifting entrepreneurs
that have ever lived well the man that
sits in front of me today was given that
privilege he got to follow Steve Job
jobs until the day that he died and he
got to follow Elon Musk for years and
years and years in order to write down
what he saw and share that information
with you if you've ever wondered what it
takes to be a genius what it takes to
change the world what the cost is the
sacrifice how to make decisions how to
think in how and what motivates these
world changing entrepreneurs in the next
hour and a half you find out and before
this episode starts I want to make a
deal with you about 58% of you that
watch this podcast frequently haven't
yet hit the Subscribe button if you
enjoy what we do here here's the deal
that I want to make with you if you hit
that subscribe button I promise you that
we will keep making the show better in
every single way and we have huge plans
to turn this into more of a documentary
style conversation where we work
incredibly hard to bring in footage of
the things we're talking about to give
you greater context and greater meaning
so if you hit the Subscribe button I
promise you that we will deliver an even
greater version of this show I hope you
choose to come along on this journey
enjoy this
[Music]
episode Walter you have a tremendous
amount of insight from following and
studying some of the world's greatest
minds but also from a tremendously
successful career of your own as a CEO
and as a business person for anybody
that doesn't know who are the
individuals that you've been able to
follow and study and had unique
exclusive access to it was mainly Steve
Jobs who brought us into the digital
Revolution with everything from Friendly
Computers to a thousand songs in our
pocket and I spent about two years at
his side doing a biography of him and
then Jennifer dner who I think brought
us into the LIF Sciences Revolution
because she and her colleagues uh helped
invent crisper this tool that can edit
our own DNA which is like whoa that's
transformative and so I spent a lot of
time at her Berkeley lab and learning
how to addit human genes and then after
that the next logical Choice seemed to
be Elon Musk bringing us into the era of
space travel electric vehicles
artificial intelligence and surprisingly
when I talked to him uh he had read a
couple my books he said I said I just
want to do this not based on five or 10
interviews but based on staying by your
side for two years watching you morning
noon and night whenever I want he went
okay and then I said but by the way I'm
not going to show you the book in
advance you get no control over it he
went okay I thought all right this is
going to be a fun ride were you
surprised uh I was a little bit
surprised but if you know musk he has
sort of a little super hero complex and
he thinks of himself playing big roles
on the world stage and he loves to be
transparent and I kind of suspected he
would want to have this uh there was a
mutual friend who helped broker the deal
and the friend said you know he he wants
a biography I think he sees himself in
the same trajectory as a Steve Jobs or
Jennifer dner and why did you want to do
it I wanted to do somebody who was
taking us back into the era of space
travel because I'm enough to be one of
those Geeks Who remember the countdown
of 10 N8 and you hold your breath and
they launch from Cape Canaveral uh also
I believe very much sustainable energy
is important to the planet which means
not just electric vehicles but solar
roofs and power walls and the things
he's doing I also tend to think that
he's a great engineer he understands uh
physical engineering he doesn't
understand human emotions very well
which is why he was better off with
Tesla and SpaceX and not uh buying
Twitter uh but I wanted to understand
the uh pioneering work that was being
done he's the only person who can get
astronauts from the US into orbit you
know NASA can no longer do it Boeing
can't do it so how come H how did he
make those rockets work and with Steve
Jobs what was the um access that you
were given to him oh I stayed I stayed
in his guest house right uh in his
backyard for off and on for a couple of
years it wasn't quite the access I got
to Elon Musk with Steve Jobs it might be
one week every couple of months I'd
spend uh with him with musk it was three
or four weeks per month sometimes Steve
Jobs was interesting but he was
mainly interested in the beautiful
design and conceptualizing of products
and so we'd spend a lot of time in
Johnny IV's uh wonderful Design Studio
at Apple headquarters where Steve would
spend the
afternoon hour after hour walking around
even looking at things like the European
plug for uh a charger and how it was
going to be different from the American
plug but how curved you know he just
cared about God being in the details of
each design mus cares a lot more about
executing the design through
manufacturing and assembly lines mus
spends about 80% of his hardcore mental
energy designing the machines that make
the machines in other words the Raptor
engines or the battery cells or the
Teslas and so a lot of the time I spent
with him was on assembly lines when I
sit here with CEOs or successful people
um I always start with their childhood
because I think it provides an important
context as to the people that they are
it's almost like their child you're like
a biographer you know it begins in
childhood well I mean you're the the
king of biography so I had no idea that
that's where it's meant to start it just
seems like the most obvious place
because it's the foundation of people
and those fingerprints seem to remain on
them as adults when you look at elon's
childhood do you spot things that are
the reason he is the man he is today
absolutely but let me step back and talk
about almost all the people I've written
about who are disruptors
they tend to have had uh childhoods in
which they were Misfits uh starting with
Leonardo D Vinci who I wrote about he
grew up in a small village uh he was
left-handed illegitimate his father
doesn't legitimate him he was gay he was
distracted and so he has demons driving
him as he runs away from the village of
venci to go to Florence uh and you can
go all the way through Albert Einstein
growing up Jewish in Germany Steve Job
having been adopted and adoptive family
didn't take to him and he moves on to
another one for Elon Musk it was
particularly brutal he grew up in South
Africa as a scrawny kid on the autism
spectrum so he had no social input
output skills he was no friends and he
was beaten up quite often but the scars
from that were minor compared to uh what
happened when he went home after being
beaten up once he was in the hospital
for 4 days but he gets home and his
father makes him stand in front of him
uh for 2 hours while the father tells
him he's a loser and that it was his
fault and takes a side of the kid who
beat up Elon and so it's one of the
oldest tropes in mythology which is the
aspiring young Superhero fighting the
dark side of the force and finding out
Darth Vader is his father having to
overcome those demons I think most of us
I mean you have a very interesting
background yourself from Botswana to
Manchester to here in London I think
most of us have things that drive us and
sometimes there's some demons from
childhood but the question is whether
you harness those demons or those demons
harness you and in Elon Musk case the
answer is both do you find that that's
nearly always the case that that those
demons create both your as Tim Grover
said to me Tim Grover was the coach for
Michael Jordan Kobe and he speaks to
everybody having a dark side and a light
side and they have a two-way
relationship with each other they
typically come from the same place so he
had speak to Michael Jordan's greatness
coming from the same place that his Dark
Side came from and you've just described
the entire theme of the Eline MK book
which is darkness and lightness woven
together each coming from the same place
sometimes driving people crazy sometimes
driving them to do things they didn't
think they'd be able to
do and do you want to take out the dark
strands of Elon mus the demon mode as
his girlfriend Grimes calls it where he
just truly gets cold and in a very bad
place but if you take out those strands
maybe you don't have Elon Musk at the
end because the dark and the light all
come from the same
Roots Shakespeare as usual said it best
even the best are molded out of fall
and indeed that's what you're talking
about whether it's Michael Jordan a Kobe
or Elon
Musk what does Elon think of his father
did you speak to him directly about
him yes uh he doesn't speak to his
father anymore of course and uh it's
very brutal
relationship but I spoke to his father
and yeah for quite a long time and still
he's in contact with me it took a a year
of traveling around with Elon Musk
before I could get him to open up about
his father and that's why a biography
done the way Boswell did with Dr Johnson
and in a much smaller way I tried to do
with Elon Musk or Steve Jobs is
important because you're not just doing
a few interviews you're just with them
day in and day out and after a year
every now and then say tell me about
your childhood tell me about your dad
and he'd just stare blankly and be not
wanting to speak and then one day we're
actually on this plane flying to
California from Texas and once again I
just it was very quiet finally said tell
me about your dad it was about the 20th
time I'd asked him he must have been
silent for two minutes three minutes I
didn't say a word and then it started
coming out the stories of childhood and
so yeah he's still rattled by the memory
of it his father has had had two
children
by a young woman that he had raised as a
stepdaughter and so that really messed
up elon's mind elon's father raised a
stepdaughter and then had two kids with
the stepdaughter yes and so there's uh
and he's talked about it Errol musk also
is an astonishingly good engineer who
gave many uh good things in childhood he
was at times successful at times less so
arrol is his father arrol is the father
but he also instilled some of these
demons so it's the most complex
relationship now Barack Obama begins one
of his Memoirs by saying I think every
successful man is either trying to live
up to the expectations of his father or
live down the sins of his father and uh
Obama says in my case it's both well
elon's case it's both and what did you
learn if anything from speaking to
elon's father I learned that he was like
a Dr Jackal and Mr Hyde in the Stevenson
thing and uh novel In other words he
could be a brilliant doctor but then
he'd snap into these demon-like modes
and Mr Hyde and hardly remember when he
would snap back out and became Dr Jackal
hardly remember what happened
and that multiple personality was very
much what Errol musk himself says yes I
go through these things well guess what
you see that in Elon Musk based on what
you saw in some of the resilient leaders
that you've followed if your job was to
create a really resilient child what
would you do to the child you know
that's such an interesting question and
those of us who have children in this
day and age I think we can't help but
coddling them too much I watch the way
Elon was raised in South Africa where
they you know his father gave him a
motorcycle when he was 11 or 12 years
old and drive you know going around he
would uh almost free range be that way
uh Elon would he could walk or go
wherever he wanted get beaten up uh and
his parents weren't hovering
well likewise I watch Elon who has 10
surviving children and Elon is deeply
committed to this children he's almost
obsessed by them and yet especially with
little ex I don't know if you've seen
the three-year-old kid who is always in
the pictures with Elon like if you see a
picture of Elon at the
F1 he's always holding his I I'd be
there at night they'd be doing a solo
roof installation at midnight and musk
would be in you know hyperdrive uh
getting all the equipment and telling
people what to do cuz must love to be
Hands-On and I'd watch Lil XX playing
amid the cables and heavy equipment and
my instincts are like go grab this kid
and make sure he's safe but I think that
musk I remember when they shot off
Starship this largest rocket ever for
the first test which went well for about
3 minutes and afterwards were sitting in
down in South Texas at the Launchpad
behind it and having drinks in their
fire pits and Elon is there with his
mother may his girlfriend Grimes and
Little X and ex is playing in a fire pit
just putting things in and putting and
my instincts are go grab the kid and
musk says to me when I was a kid they
used to say don't play with matches so I
got a box of matches and I played with
them behind a tree and it was his way of
saying I'm going to let X continue to do
that and may mus said I think it's one
generation of risk Seekers training the
next so maybe we should allow our kids
to be a little bit more risk-taking as
opposed to hovering the way my wife and
I do and I I was reading in your book
about how when elon's parents got a
divorce when he was young that meant
that elon's mother he was taking care of
him had to then go and get a job which
left Elon at home alone right right
that's what I'm saying he was pretty
much hom his mother had three jobs at
times and she's a great person but she
wasn't somebody who doed and worried
every moment of the day and so she was
often not around and divorced from his
father at one point Elon as a very young
teenager decides to move back in with
his father which is
psychologically uh even now may must
says I why did he do that and Kimble his
brother says he Associates pain with
love
and Elon Musk says to me
adversity shaped me it made me who I am
so there's a part of Elon mus that loves
drama and R rushing into the fire he
Associates pain with love from your
observations do you believe that
regardless of whether it's healthy or
not we tend to seek out the environment
of our childhood when we're older
because familiarity is
almost sometimes seems to be more
important to us than whether it's
healthy you know that's a brilliant
observation which is because certainly
with Elon Musk he's almost always trying
to recreate the drama the turmoil of his
childhood in apartheid South Africa
seeing people killed and uh having an
abusive psychologically abusive father
and I think we're all different I'm
personally somebody had a pretty nice
childhood my parents were the sweetest
nicest smartest people I've ever known
and I grew up in New Orleans and still
go back there still live with about
eight blocks from where I was born and
see the kids I went to kindergarten with
and I love going back to that magical we
call it the green trees of our
childhood uh but it's also why I'm not
driven I'm not as a disruptor the way
jobs and musk are I'm a little bit more
suited to being amused and watching
disruptors so my role is a little bit
more as an observer you've been both
you've been an observer on this podcast
or on TV but you're also a person in the
arena by starting companies I was in the
arena quite a while I ran CNN during the
Gulf War and it was a pretty intense
thing to
do but in some way ways I'm not as
suited to running into fire and turmoil
as Elon Musk is and when the time came
and the Gulf War was over I decided I'd
rather write books and uh have a go back
to New Orleans so do you you did touch
on this earlier but I just it just came
back to mind again do you think that
these individuals who are most able to
deal with running into the fire are
those that were raised in the
fire it's not a onetoone corelation as
people sometimes when they're arguing
with me they say oh look there are
people with really bad childhoods who
become totally near to Wells and you
know never amount to anything they
people with really wonderful childhoods
who are very very driven I think though
it's a it may not be a onetoone
correlation but it's certainly a nonzero
correlation that having something to
prove coming out of childhood and having
demons to harness tend ends to drive you
a bit more one of the things that
surprised me in your book was that you
said Elon was a good student but not
fantastic yeah even in South Africa and
at boy school and then when he goes to
college his sats are fine but you know
they're not all 800s which is the scale
we use in the US uh for uh College
admissions test but he had an intense
Focus so when he focused on something
you know he would be awesomely smart
problem is he doesn't like things that
don't interest him so when he had to
learn Africans in school and you know he
flunks it or when he has to learn
certain things uh but when it came to
engineering especially Material Science
he could focus like a laser on and I
mean that figuratively but on the
properties of materials that or
engineering
problems and I I heard that when he
discovered the computer that was another
example of that that insane Focus he
taught himself to cod in a sure I mean
he he grew up at that time that I can
remember and you can't where computers
suddenly pop up MH you can have your own
computer and that's one of the things
Steve Jobs and Bill Gates and uh brought
us to which is oh a computer you can
actually plug in and have it home and
code on well he got one and taught
himself C++ and I think uh maybe uh py
uh Pascal and at age 12 or 13 coded his
own video game called blastar which he
published and he becomes addicted to two
things one is computers and two is video
games did did did um you you spoke to
his mother quite a lot yeah still do
she's very much around what did she
think of him at that age when he's 11 12
did they did she think he was a genius
yes she uh for better or worse uh was
not a doting mother was not somebody
hovering all the time but was when Elon
was five or six years old she decided he
was a genius and used to fight with the
schools when the schools would sometimes
say he's not doing well in school and
he'd be distracted he's always looking
out of the window and staring blankly
and she would say because he's a genius
and you're not challenging him enough
and and I think she still feels he's a
genius do you think if someone wanted to
be like Elon Musk they could choose to
be no um there are certain types of
curiosity and drive that we can Will
ourselves to being I've written about
Benjamin Franklin for example Benjamin
Franklin was very wise but he's probably
not the smartest of the founders and I
don't mean that in a disparaging way but
you have Hamilton and Jefferson and
people really brilliant what you have in
Franklin is somebody who's purely
curious always open to new ideas and
unbelievably observant well we can all
push ourselves to be that way more but
can we push ourselves to be Einstein and
no we can't and for musque he has a
certain
intensity that I think that even if you
drank 50 cups of coffee and you know you
put an electric uh volt uh uh prod in
the back of your head that focus and
maniacal intensity and sense of urgency
is something that's not instilled in
most of
us do you think it's a trauma response
of sorts it's a trauma response it's
also and the book is got a lot you know
of P you know it's you can't have a one
sentence here's why but you start in
childhood with the trauma you also start
with a guy who's on the autism spectrum
talks about having Asbergers as he calls
it and that means he doesn't have good
input output signals for emotional you
doesn't have good emotional human
receptors but he does
have this
intense Focus almost in the geek like
way on certain engineering or
mathematical or coding issues I think
everything from his hard wirring to his
childhood and
upbringing help make somebody who's
addicted to turmoil who has a maniacal
intensity of focus and also has multiple
personality mood
swings he ends up leaving South Africa
and studies uh physics and business at
the same time and I was I thought it was
so fascinating that the reason why he
took up business which is quite rare for
someone to do physics in business I
think he said he didn't want to end up
working for somebody who studied
business uh and didn't understand the
science and he felt that if he didn't
understand the business side he'd end up
having to work for somebody else it's
almost the first evidence of like well
not the first evidence but it's again
evidence of his first principal thinking
in place yes you know first principal
thinking is key that doesn't know and
first principal thinking is whenever
you're faced with a problem you just go
back to the very basic physics of it not
all the rules and regulations and not
all the metaphors you may have saying
here's a way to do things but you you
first off say there are no rules there's
no
regulations there's no protocols except
for the laws of physics everything else
is just a recommendation and to give you
a concrete example when he decides that
he wants to send people into space as a
young guy at first he goes to Russia to
see if he can buy used
rockets and they Jack them around it
doesn't work and on the plane fight home
he says let me go to first principal
thinking exactly how much is the cost of
each material in a rocket how much is
the Incan now how much is the carbon
fiber how much is the fuel and then how
much is the total cost of a rocket
compared to the cost of each of the
components and that's first principal
thinking which is I get it if I can I
know the material cost but if I can
reduce by a factor of 10 the
manufacturing cost then I can make a
rocket and so somebody will tell them
hey we need to have this patch or this
piece of felt in the bottom of a Tesla
and he'd say tell me what the physics of
of the principles of physics that make
that true are when he's pursuing first
principles what is he trying to get
around and past that that frustrates him
regulations rules people who won't take
risks he says that you know the US was a
nation of risk-takers whether you came
on the Mayflower you came across a Rio
Grand or you came from Eastern Europe
fleeing oppression your family took
risks but now we've got more Regulators
than we have Risk Takers we have more
referees and people building guard rails
and lawyers telling you that's probably
not a good idea then we have people
willing to shoot up a rock ET and I
think by going back to First
principles he wants to be able to not
only calculate risk but take risk more
than most people would was Steve Jobs
the same and that regard Steve Jobs was
not focused on Hardware Engineering in
the same way wnc was his
partner uh but yes
jobs had a particular phrase very famous
now which was think different and when
Steve Jobs went back to Apple after his
like sort of like Sam mman you know come
and go come and go it took Steve Jobs a
decade not a weekend to do it um he
wrote an ad uh for
apple and it had pictures of Einstein
and other disruptive intellects and it
said here's to the Mi Here's To The
Crazy Ones The Misfits the Rebels the
round pegs in the square hole the ones
who think different and then it ends by
saying because the people who are crazy
enough to think they can change the
world are the ones who do and that was
Steve Jobs's way of thinking and it also
describes Elon Musk have you seen
moments yourself when you were following
him where he was confronted by someone
who had a default to telling him why
things couldn't happen and why they
couldn't be done oh absolutely I mean
there's like 20 30 times in the book
it's just and he goes Bist like I'll
tell you a fun one which is just last
Christmas you know not too long ago he
was at Twitter
headquarters and he looks at all the
engineering things and they have three
server farms uh for uh one in Portland
one in Sacramento and one I think in
Atlanta and he does the calculus in his
head and he said we don't really need
three different redundant server farms
and the engineers say well yes we do
because we need backups and we need
caching or whatever and he says now
you're not going back to first principal
linking if you look at this anyway he
decides they should get rid of the
servers in Sacramento well they say fine
but that'll take six months because and
he said no you can do it in six weeks
and the engineer and I'm sitting there
in the meeting and he's getting really
dark and they don't know how to deal
with him because it is like a month
after he took over Twitter so they don't
know this dude and they're saying well
no I'm sorry Elon we can't do it and
that and he'd say you can do it in six
weeks and by the end of the meeting he
said you can do it in six days it gets
really dark and he decides he's going to
fire them but it's December 23rd so it's
like two days before Christmas he does
fire them but the next day Christmas Eve
he's flying from San Francisco to Austin
Texas to go home for Christmas he's with
two young cousins on the plane who are
engineers and one of them says why don't
we just take those servers out ourselves
Elon must makes a U-turn in his airplane
tells the pilot to go to Sacramento they
were already over Nevada they land he
rents there by four of them on the plan
they rent a truck a sort of what we call
a U-Haul truck a rental truck and they
go to the server facility and they the
guard there is like flumix it's
Christmas Eve and they're forcing their
way in and they're looking at the
servers and one of the engineers say
well you know we can't take them out
because we need Engineers to take off
these elevated floors you know those
floor tiles where people and mus turns
to his bodyguard and says do you got a
pocket knife the guy goes yeah he takes
a pocket knife and pulls up one of the
vents rips up the floor thing goes
underneath the floor panel with a set of
wire cutters that he got from Home Depot
and cuts the cable to the servers and
they start moving them out and put them
in the U-Haul truck and this is must
just and by the way it's typical of musk
because it works fine for a few days
then you can see the service getting a
bit degraded but then eventually it
comes back and he says you got to take
risks if if you're not sort of causing
20% of the problems from the risk you
take you're not taking enough risk but
there it is and they got rid of that
server Farm in
Sacramento what happens to the people
that musk works with when they see that
case study that in that moment he when
he presented that they could do it in
six weeks and it turns out he was right
that it could be done quicker is that
what sort of galvanizes the totally and
about 20 to 30% of the people who work
with him can go March through fire with
him that way and realize what he can do
but it's why 80% of the people who
worked at Twitter when he took it over
are
gone but it's tough to work with there's
another scene in the book where on a
late Friday night he's down in the Sou
Tip of Texas where they have the
Launchpad for Star base and it's a
Friday night after 10 p.m. and he looks
at the Launchpad area says why are there
only three or four people working and
this poor guy Andy Krabs nice tall you
know Southern young engineer says well
it's a Friday night and we don't have
any launches scheduled and musk goes
dark on them and says I want tomorrow a
hundred people working I want them to
come from California Florida get them in
here and we're going to stack this
rocket even though we're not planning to
launch anytime soon but we're going to
have What's called the Surs and they fly
people in people are sleeping on the
ground on the floors to do this Surge
and Andy kreb survives it and does
pretty well but eventually he quits he
says man I'm have a kid I just can't
keep going through these things with
Elon and so that's in the book about 3
weeks ago I was in Los Angeles
and talking about the book and I see
this tall guy I recognized coming up
after the speech it's Sandy Krabs I said
what's happened he said well as you know
I quit and I came back to Los Angeles
and I got a much easier job but I
decided I'd rather be burned out than
bored and I've asked Elon if it could
come back because I don't want to miss
working for SpaceX so interesting the um
you know the acquisition of Twitter
Twitter was a very from you know think
about where it's based and how it was
run and all the things we've come to
learn about the company and it sort of
political leanings it was very much the
antithesis of the musk approach to and
he had become over the past three or
four years he's edged from being what I
would call A Center left uh somebody who
donated to Obama and voted for
Biden uh to somebody who has become I
think far
too worked up about what he calls the
woke mind virus you know the
progressive uh mindset that he sees in
colleges and in schools multiple reasons
which I go through in the book what's
the most important reason well the most
personal
reason is he had
uh five older children teenagers uh
surviving one died in infancy and the
oldest of them was named Xavier after
his favorite uh character in the X-Men
comics and Xavier Transitions and sends
a note about three years ago saying I'm
transitioning my name is now Jenna and
don't tell my father now he gets his
head around the fact that she
transitioned and he loves her but she
becomes very anti- capitalist very woke
hates all billionaires thinks capitalism
is theft and rejects him and changes her
last name and this causes him an enor
amount of pain and he partly blames it
on Los Angeles where you live sometimes
there's this very Progressive school she
went to called
Crossroads and that was one of about
seven or eight factors that led to this
political
Evolution where he felt the progressive
left was overdoing covid lockdowns was
overdoing gender ideology questions in
some ways it echoed his father who was
also somewhat conspiratorial in his
thinking and didn't believe in vaccines
or Dr fouchy or and it's a weird
Evolution that we still see
reverberating in the waters of Twitter
today you say that it caused him a
tremendous amount of pain that Xavier
transitioned and is now a woman how do
you know that it caused him pain well he
said so and he he's easy to read even
though he don't read people's emotions
well I mean he will say nothing caus has
caused me more pain he says this
outright than uh his daughter rejecting
him not transitioning but just totally
rejecting him other than the death of
his first child through in infancy his
first child died and he gets very dark
and you know you talk to his sister You'
talk to his brother or his brother's
wife they say that's the thing that's
caused him enormous personal pain and he
says so going back to when he acquired
Twitter um I as a great fan of what Elon
has achieved in the service that he's
sort of served to humanity with some of
these companies like Tesla and SpaceX I
was really hoping he didn't buy the
company because I thought it would just
be a great distraction from Bingo really
important other things
100% you were you were there right at
the time I was there so I'm sitting here
just open Giga Texas which is the
largest Factory manufacturing things
that's a Tesla Factory in Austin Texas
on the mezzanine the factory is not even
open yet uh I guess this is April 2022
and he tells me that he still needs more
drama in his life he can accept the fact
that he's now become the richest person
on Earth he's person of the year for
financial times and time he sent up 33
rockets that year that landed safely and
were
reused and yet he says okay I'm buying
Twitter and his brother his son Griffin
his we're all like his friends three or
four friends is like is this a good idea
aren't you going to be
distracted and everybody is sort of
trying to talk them out of it I'm not
because I'm just taking notes I'm just
the Observer but I'm thinking boy this
is a bad idea not simply because it'll
be a distraction but
because you don't have I'm thinking of
musk he doesn't
have emotional human emotional awareness
and so I asked him why are you doing it
and he said well it's a product problem
they need better engineering they
haven't put any new features in they
don't have full motion video so it's an
engineering challenge I'm thinking no
Twitter's not an engineering product
you've been through all these before
it's an advertising medium it's supposed
to gather eyeball calls for
advertisers in a friendly environment
and that's not elon's specialty so I
think it was was then and is now both a
distraction and does not play to his
strengths did you see it at any point
and do you believe it will hurt the
trajectory of Tesla and SpaceX in any
way that acquisition I think that it
probably hurts his reputation especially
among more Progressive people uh it
obviously has hurt which means it
probably has hurt Tesla
sales Esra SpaceX I don't think it
matters too much he has been able to be
intensely focused including I mean just
today while we're taping this I think
he's doing the 40th launch this year of
the Falcon 9 sending up 20 more
starlinks satellites he launched
Starship and got it all the way into
space all 33 Raptor engines working and
he's down there intensely focused so I
think SpaceX is okay I think Tesla will
be okay but it' be better off if he
wen't if a he weren't distracted by
Twitter and B if his reputation hadn't
become 10 times more controversial which
is not great if you're just trying to do
a mass market car sales when he went
into Twitter one of the um the very
alarming things that he did was there
was rumors that he called everyone up to
the top floor and said this is going to
be the new company culture if you don't
like it absolutely I mean I was there I
walked in with I it was there that the
day before he took over he marches
in and I think there's a whole chapter
in the book almost in the rapid change
in corporate culture that happened
something you're very familiar with from
companies you've dealt with which is a
two way two extremes of doing a company
one was the way Twitter was which is
nurturing and sweet and having yoga
rooms and artisanal coffee bars and when
musk walks in they're showing him how we
have quiet spaces for people who need
you know to get their mental energy
restored and they said we value
psychological safety and musk looked at
me and kind of did his raspy laugh it
says psychological safety blank that you
know screw
that an urgent
intensity is our operating principle
psychological safety is our enemy and so
he turns it into a hardcore Allin
environment where you have to say I'm
Allin you're going to work 247 some
weekends cuz you're all in and he said I
want a team that's 20% of the size but
that
an order of magnitude more intense and
more Allin and you've probably seen
companies with your own eyes who are
very nurturing and you've seen companies
in which everybody's doing a hardcore
all-in hackathon on a Saturday night and
he's in the latter
Camp do you believe I often speak to
large organizations that have cultural
problems they they're not Innovative
they're being eroded away by um New
Market entrance Etc and the problem they
have is they can't turn the ship around
quickly enough before the Innovation
takes them out big companies that have
50,000 people big I I've often want
because then I saw this Elon Musk
approach to Turning culture around where
you basically let off a grenade in the
building
totally do you believe there's Merit in
that that
approach yes but I also believe there's
a big old downside and like everything
with Elon Musk including the shooting
off of the Rockets you get amazing
things happen but
also Rubble in the wake and damage in
the wake and personal damage uh Tesla he
did that once there's a guy John mcneel
in the book who was president of Tesla
another couple of people did they all
say it which is maybe that's the price
you have to pay if you want to be this
disruptive but is it a price that I want
to pay the answer is no and maybe it's
too high of a price causing so much
emotional turmoil but there are people
including the guy Andy Krebs I told you
about who wants to go back to work at
SpaceX who like the challenge who like
the emotional turmoil I ran Time
Magazine it was the good old days and it
was about as wonderful of an environment
even you would be in the clouds thinking
about in the uh 1990s we were rolling in
money before the disruption of the
internet takes away the idea of a
general interest paper
magazine and we had there was a drinks
cart that would come around every day at
5: and make cocktails for all the
writers there was a roast beef carv cart
in the evenings there were Town Cars
that would take you out to your weekend
houses it was totally great and that
environment needed to be disrupted but
it was a glorious when it happened then
I went to CNN and for a while the Gulf
War we know exactly what we're doing but
once the Gulf War was over CNN needed
deep disruption and I was not very good
at being a disruptive leader of firing
like Elon mus could 80% of the people so
sometimes CNN was one of those big old
battleships was as you said lots of
people working
there it probably needed a more
disruptive leader than I was
so interesting so do you think that
there's a certain type of cultural
approach that Su suits a certain type of
company especially as we look at the
world of AI and Robotics and how things
are going to be accelerating so quickly
in technology it seems to be the case
that companies are going to need to
disrupt themselves faster than ever if
you believe some of the forecasts about
the future that people like Ray kwell
posit yeah and not only it used to be
tech companies would have to be
disruptive but now if you're an
insurance company if you're a law firm
you know if you're a bank the disruption
is going to happen uh if you're a
healthc care company so yeah we're going
to have to be disruptive that doesn't
necessarily mean an Allin intense
hackathon work all weekend culture is
necessary I think it's great to have
corporate cultures in both sides it's
like return to work after covid I'm not
sure there's exactly one answer there's
some companies that say you know what
remote working get us really good people
who uh can do better things and there
are other people who say Noah I got to
have my people back in the office I
think it's good to experiment or not
just experiment but have Alternatives
some people work better in some
environment some in others and you could
also ask the question not just about
corporate environments but corporate
leaders which is what you discuss most
of the time some corporate leaders have
got to be you know Steve Jobs or Bill
Gates in the early days of Microsoft or
Bezos in the early days of Amazon or
musk you know basically at
times and uh but then some corporate
leaders like Jennifer dower or even a
Ben Franklin lead by being collaborative
and inspiring and nice and I think the
advice any CEO needs is the oldest piece
of advice on this planet may be for
humans which is on the Oracle of Deli
Arch which is just know thyself and you
got to know here's my Approach and
here's where I feel most comfortable
interesting cuz I was just about to ask
you which approach you think is
generally more effective but you know
for me I couldn't do the
Allin
jerk you know the like approach
and there were times I needed to do that
and jobs Steve Jobs would say to me it's
why you were never quite as good but I
also think he would say that to you yeah
he would say you all he called it velvet
gloves I guess a matter he said people
like yourself when you ran companies you
had velvet gloves on and you were always
trying to make people feel comfortable
he said for me I got to make them feel
uncomfortable I have to make them feel
challenged I don't have the luxury I
don't have the luxury of uh uh
tolerating B players and coddling them
so I you know I know what type I am but
I think at times you can create a very
creative place where people feel very
comfortable and it allows great
creativity to flourish but I think you
have to sometimes
say we got to be hardcore here we're
being challenged I would also say it's
not just about the leader it's about the
leadership team if you're going to make
a good company you have to make the
right team and when I ran CNN time I
realized maybe I was a little bit too
velvet gloved as Steve Jobs would say
but I made sure in my leadership team
there were people who had Iron Fists and
could take Intel a great company when it
was founded and leadership team you had
to have Andy Gro you had to have um Bob
noise who was the
nicest friendliest CEO ever he put his
desk in the middle of the room and just
Lov
you know people you had to have somebody
like Gordon Moore of Moore's Law who was
a Visionary but you also they have to
bring in Andy Grove who is really tough
and gets the microchips out the door and
so every leadership team needs to have
the Hammer as well as the inspiring nice
guy both Steve Jobs and Elon Musk did
they what was their view on being liked
as a
leader both of them told me that that
could
be a failing that that could be a
weakness which is if you try too hard to
be liked you're not going to be
disruptive enough
and musk even said empathy and
collegiality can be your
enemy and M uh jobs told me you think
you're very empathetic and you care
about other people's feelings but
sometimes you take it too far and you do
it out of vanity you want people to like
you you care too much about whether the
people working with you love you and he
said that's not the way to create a
disruptive
organization did you agree with him yeah
I agree I think I ran Ty magazine just
fine we can ask other people but uh uh
but with CNN
I sat there worrying about I won't name
names but these anchors on CNN who truly
uh were problematic and yet I wanted
them all to like me and I was probably
not tough enough but I also finally got
to the know thyself which is all right
this is not the job for me
because I'm better off trying to inspire
teams that are friendly and collegial
the way Jennifer dner the hero in of my
book the Codebreaker the one who helped
invent crisper
technology in her lab and in her
companies if they're going to hire
somebody new even a graduate student to
be in you know working with the pipets
and the test tubes they make sure the
whole team meets that person and then
they all discuss will this person fit in
well whereas and that's a culture that I
can relate to but in El mus says no I
remember him yelling at some of his
Finance people who were friendly with
some of the engineers and said no
collegiality is your enemy you do not
want them to like you you're there to
challenge them if they like you too much
you're not doing your
job but do elon's employees like
him elon's employees
generally uh will walk through a wall
for him those who have survived whether
it be Gwen Shotwell or
uh who is a president of SpaceX or
people uh at Mark juncosa or the people
at Tesla like Drew balino or fron V
holzen but he burns out people pretty
fast so if he's in an organization after
a few years maybe
20% are totally loyal and survive but
he's not afraid of burning people out
and having him leave sounds like they
either love him will leave yeah and as I
say sometimes with Andy Krebs they love
him but then they leave but then they
come back some people truly want the
challenge as Steve Jobs said to Scully
the guy he um hired to run uh Apple for
a while he was at Pepsi he said do you
want to make sugar water the rest of
your life or do you want to change the
world and I've seen mus talk to the
people at SpaceX late at night maybe
midnight where they're all still working
uh at the Launchpad or the
factory and they'll say I know how hard
you're working but this is the most
exciting job you could possibly have
it's the most exciting important job on
Earth which is getting people to Mars
whatever is the second most exciting you
can't even think of it what it is
because this is by far the most exciting
thing you could be doing and there are
people who buy into that and I could sit
there watching the moon rise over the
Gulf of Mexico and him saying that and I
could see why people buy into that I
could also see why some people say I'd
rather have a wife and kids and get off
Friday night at 5:00 p.m. does he
believe it when he says that and to
typically people believe it when they
hear
it when he first say said to me that he
had three missions to get Humanity to
Mars to have sustainable energy on this
plan planet and to make robots safe I
thought it was a type of pontification
you do on podcasts like this one or pep
talks for your team but then I'd hear
him say it over and over again and I'd
hear him say it almost to himself as he
walked around and saw something B he
said we'll never get to Mars we'll never
get and almost staring into the distance
sometimes he said we've got to get to
Mar you we've got to if we don't do this
we'll never get Humanity tomorrow we'll
never get the world to electric
vehicles I totally think he believes
it why does he care so much about
Mars he
believes in space fairing in other words
we have to be space adventurers for two
or three reasons one is he believes that
human consciousness is rare and maybe
unique they nowhere else in the universe
do we know that there's Consciousness
and why because if Consciousness existed
somewhere else it it probably never
became multiplanetary before the planet
it was on got destroyed there not
something you and I wake up worrying
about but it's a kid there a 15-year-old
he's worried about the extinguishing of
human consciousness if something happens
to our
planet secondly he says it's the Great
Adventure we wake up every morning we
got all sorts of problems to worry about
there more problems in Ukraine to the
Middle East to Congress to you know
whatever it may be at whiteall at the
moment but we have to have our vision
set on some things that Inspire us that
are truly make humans what they are and
there's nothing more inspiring than the
notion of being an adventurer of going
to New Frontiers and the greatest New
Frontier is space so I think those are
the reasons is not because he wants to
make money if you if you decide you want
to be the richest person on Earth you
know step one isn't start a rocket
company so I think he believes in the
mission and do you think that he's at
all scared that he might not get there
in his lifetime yeah I think that he
wakes up all the time calculating that
he's 50 whatever two or three years
old that maybe he's got 30 years not
that he necessarily wants to go to Mars
but he wants a mission to Mars and he
believes it'll be within 10 years but
he's always wrong by you know two or
three times like how fast self-driving
will come to be how fast the Cyber truck
will be made how fast we'll get to Mars
I think in 30 years there will be
missions to Mars I think in 10 years
it's unlikely and I think that's the
spread that he's worried about as
someone like Elon that thinks in terms
of first principles when he's trying
doing those calculations about how how
long he's got left to live and the
development of SpaceX and Rockets and
trying to correlate whether trying to
figure out if he'll get there in his
lifetime does he not then look at his
health and go well one way to extend the
amount of time I have on Earth is to
really obsess about my health from
everything I've read he doesn't seem
particularly interested in his health
now he makes fun of his Tech Bros who
are sitting there with
longevity uh plans of how they're going
to live to be much longer uh and no he
does not care enough about his health
for a he's very he's overweight now for
a while a year ago he decided to go on
an intermittent fasting diet and also
was using whatever those drugs are
called you know the diet weight loss
drugs yeah those weight loss drugs and I
remember being with him one morning he
could only have one meal a day because
of this and we went to something called
the paloalto creery I think it's called
some Diner and Little X was with us and
musk ordered a double bacon cheeseburger
with sweet potato fries and an Oreo
chocolate chip milkshake and said okay
it's my one meal of the day and I'm
thinking I'm not a diet uh expert but
this does not seem like the healthiest
way to either lose weight or remain
healthy does that seem like a bit of a
contradiction to you in some respects
that he's not he's crazy I mean and yeah
but he's not I mean I look at say sam
Altman Sam Altman is very disciplined in
both exercise and diet uh Jeff Bezos is
now that way elon's not that way you
know you're probably pretty good at die
and exercise you know me I try pretty
hard but I'm not quite as good elon's at
the side where he's he's fanatic on many
many things but uh getting on the
treadmill and taking care of himself is
not one of them did you ever see him
exercise while you with him he has only
one home now because when his daughter
transitioned and became very anti-
capitalist he thought that if selling
all five of his pretty nice homes he
would just live very frugally and that
would please her which didn't work but
he's got this two-bedroom house and a
town in South Texas where star base is
and there's a little room that has one
of those trainers and every now and then
I'd be just sitting in that house day in
and day out and' say maybe I should use
that more I don't use it that much I've
never seen him say Well I've got to go
to the gym he
doesn't meditate do yoga swim or do
things that would both clear your mind
and relax your body how would you
characterize his mental
health incredibly Mercurial what what
does that mean means that it goes
through multiple phases personalities
and there will be times when he's
perfectly cheerful inspiring sometimes
funny sometimes focused on engineering
there'll be times when he gets into a
very what Grimes calls demon mode and he
says he's probably bipolar he's never
been diagnosed but he uses some
medication has been prescribed and so he
will get into these mood swings where he
can be Manic and depressive and bipolar
and so his mental health is not
great the difficult question and the
book wrestles with him with this and you
said at the beginning smart thing you
said at the beginning of this
show was to what extent is that woven
into who he is
and do those strands also cause him to
have the
drives in the time that you observed him
in the years that you were with him were
you ever concerned about him yeah I mean
there times when he would go into what I
would almost feel was a tail spin and
even times before I knew him like 2018
he goes into total melt down he almost
catatonic lying on the floor of the
factory in Fremont Texas
and the people who work with him can't
Rouse him because he's in a you know
catatonic State he's sending off
horrible tweets back then calling some
cave diver a pedophile or saying he's
going to take Tesla private and you see
that recur every now and then even this
past month he hasn't been as far as I
know in any bad catatonic state but
he'll get into a dark mood late at night
and do tweets that are conspiratorial
and dark and
self-destructive at Christmas he was
with his brother and some other
relatives and they all sit around
talking this is the day after the server
uh Farm anecdote I told you about and
they asked what do you regret most this
year and he says I regret the fact that
every now and then I start shooting
myself in the foot or stabbing myself in
the thigh that he gets into these
periods with all these um great leaders
there's a word you use throughout which
is the word team um the definition of
the word company is group of people how
do they go about hiring great
people with
musk he says that you always look first
for the right
attitude
skills
knowledge they can all be acquired but a
change in Attitude requires a brain
transplant so you make sure they have an
all-in hardcore for attitude early on
first few years of SpaceX and Tesla he
interviewed everybody uh that they were
hiring he's built a good team but an
unstable one people come and go more
often but there are people like Gwen
Shotwell who for more than 20 years has
helped run SpaceX and Mark junos has
been probably the chief technology
officer there likewise you have a pretty
stable team at Tesla Steve J was a
specialist at building teams when he was
dying uh I was in his backyard with him
and I asked him what's the best product
you ever made and I thought he'd say the
iPhone or maybe the Mac he said well
building those products is hard but
what's really important is building a
team that will continue to build
products so the best thing I did was the
team at app and that's the Johnny i Phil
Schiller Ed a q uh Tim Cook team musque
is not as much of a superstar building
team but he does get hardcore dedicated
leaders to work for him and do they both
think that the team is the most
important thing hiring great people I
would say
that jobs definitely thought that I
think musk if you ask him would say he
thinks that but one of the things he
hasn't done perfect ly is if he left
Tesla you know there's Tom zuu there's
Drew bino there's some people but it's
not as if he has a big team in place as
easily uh it's he's a little bit
more the total boss and uh he'll not try
to run everything but he'll Focus man
Aly on specific things and he does not
de I guess the best way to say it is he
doesn't delegate Authority as easily as
I think other leaders do on the flip
side of that his maniacal intensity to
detail means that unlike Boeing he knows
how to get Rockets into orbit what are
the um principles of success or
leadership that both Steve and Elon
share
first of all a passion musk had a
passion for beauty and even the beauty
of the parts unseen I remember when I
was first working with Steve Jobs he had
the same Steve would take me around the
backyard of his house where he grew up
in a small track home in California and
there's a fence and he made me look at
the back of the fence which fac scrub he
said my dad said we had to make the back
of the fence just as beautiful as the
front of the fence and Steve said to his
father why nobody will see it nobody
will know and he said yes but you will
know if you have a passion for
Perfection you care even about the
beauty of the parts unseen and so both
Steve Jobs and Elon Musk cared more
about details than your average CEO they
cared in Jobs's case how the chips on
the circuit board and the original
McIntosh looked and whether the circuit
board itself was beautiful even though
nobody would ever see it it was in a
sealed case and MK the night he the
Twitter board accepted his offer he
spends two hours in the Tiny Town in
South Texas going over a valve in the
Raptor engines under Starship and why it
was leaking and there was a methane leak
and just became involved in the details
and both of them felt that if you have a
passion and intensity on the
details the rest will follow more easily
what what was their um approach to kind
of linked to that their approach to
experimentation it's something that I'm
absolutely obsessed with conducting as
many experiments as we possibly can in
the shortest amount of time we can to
get information back yeah one of the
things that must is
successful because of is his ability to
iterate to take risks to conduct
experiments twice now he's launched
Starship which as I say is by far the
biggest rocket ever made and both times
you saw Stories the next day saying must
launches rocket it explodes well he
thinks both those were a success because
he says if you're not failing 20% of the
time you're not risking enough and so
each of those are attempts to figure out
to take a risk shoot something off and
see what goes wrong and then to fix it
if you have a risk averse culture like
NASA or Boeing or locked or others
you're not experimenting
enough
and the experim by definition an
experiment involves the unknown and
taking a
risk how do they keep their cultures to
be pro- risk and um to stop them getting
complacent with their success well I
don't think musk has a problem with
complacency because he's so intense and
hardcore that the minute
you know I've watched so many meetings
where even at Twitter where somebody
says we can't do this we can't take away
the blue checks we can't uh change from
uh carbon fiber to stainless steel on a
particular compound or we can't do cyber
truck because cyber truck is too edgy
and it's made of stainless steel and it
it's frightening to look at and it'll
scare
people and he'll just either run rough
shot over them or fire them or push them
to realizing yeah let's make cyber truck
look very futuristic and let's make it
totally out of stainless steel and let's
have the stainless steel being an e
exoskeleton so you don't have to have
internal chassis as much these are wild
out-of-the-box things and they resisted
him on Cyber TR they resisted him on
Starship they resisted him on even some
of the battery changes he's made or
things but or resist him on the amount
of servers you need at uh Twitter or the
rules for engagement on Twitter I think
sometimes it doesn't work I think
Twitter is kind of toxic in places
because he thought you could get rid of
the moderation teams and do it through
an
algorithm but he pushes things 80% of
which succeed it means there's a lot of
rubble in the Wake though do do you
think they're somewhat delusional these
people I think they're crazy and as Jobs
would say crazy enough to think they can
change the world and thus they become
the ones who
do delusional the phrase they used for
Steve was reality Distortion field which
is just a geek Geeks way of saying
delusional meaning uh you can wish
something and think hard enough on
something and try to make it happen and
often at work with jobs he'd say you got
to shave 10 seconds off the boot up time
and they say that's reality it can't be
done and he'd say he'd stare without
blinking something his Guru had taught
him in India he'd say don't be afraid
you can do it and they would been
reality and 80% of the time he'd get it
done sometimes it doesn't work he tried
it on his cancer didn't work
uh I mean he just tried to will it
away likewise with
musk full self-driving I mean for the
past 10 eight years he's always said
it's only a year away we're going to get
there well that's reality
Distortion it's driven his team to go
further with machine learning on full
self-driving than most companies but
it's also a reality Distortion that
hasn't yet paid off deadlines you talked
kind of about it that that's the same
thing which is being delusional about
deadlines but they're forcing
functions as musk himself said when I
was talking to him once I said deadlines
man you always he says yes but I'm a
specialist at turning the impossible
into the merely very late so he misses
deadlines but he tends to eventually
deliver the the reason he's setting
deadlines even though he knows sometimes
they might might not be hit is because
it speeds up the
team yeah he says you a all in
intensity a hardcore intensity is our
operating principle and you're not going
to have that without deadlines I
remember so many times there were what
he his team calls
surges I'd see it happen almost every
month in a different field he'd say all
right we have to stack this rocket by
Friday and they say you know no it's
going to take months no it needs to be
stacked by Friday and they'd walk around
the clock and do it and then a few weeks
later he'd be on a house where they were
putting a Tesla
solar uh pan solar roof tiles and he say
you have 24 hours to redo this house
theyd say well that's nuts but he'd be
there and midnight on top of the roof
himself himself with a little X playing
on the cables down below and he would
use it as a forcing
function it drove the teams crazy but it
drove them to do things they didn't
think they could do is he happy no he's
somebody who not only is not usually
happy but he doesn't value happiness if
you said what are the top 10 things you
want in
life I don't think
happiness pleasure calmness sweetness
going to the beach none of those would
be in the top 10
he uh Tula rilly who lives here who was
married to him the English actress great
English actress she said he's not the
type who can stop and Savor or smell the
flowers he doesn't want to sit back and
be content and be happy and I asked him
about it I said okay you ever happy at
what you've achieved he said no I'm like
a video game addict when I get to to one
level of the game and I've succeeded all
I can think about is moving to the next
level of the game be it Elden ring or
polyopia is that common amongst the
great leaders that you've studied no it
um was it was definitely true of Steve
Jobs who having built the Great
computers suddenly says I want a
thousand songs in my pocket and then
when he has the iPod it's so successful
and all he does is worry about the fact
that something bad could happen and they
says well what if people the brain dead
people who make cell phones realize they
could put music on cell phones then we'd
be out of business so he starts working
on the iPhone and the iPod team says
well that's going to cannibalize us
that's going to hurt our business he
said we have to be able to cannibalize
ourselves or other people will eat us
for lunch and likewise musk is always
pushing for the next thing as a opposed
to happiness is that true of everybody
no I mean Jeff Bezos has the biggest
yacht you can imagine and more vacation
homes uh and he's happier I think uh I
mean he likes to savor his
success it's also true that his bace
company blue origin hasn't yet gotten
anybody into orbit I don't know if
there's a particular tradeoff there but
I know musk would say yeah I could be on
a yacht somewhere but that's not what I
want do you think Jeff and uh Steve do
you think Elon likes
Jeff I think they're competitors and
there's two chapters in the book called
Bezos and musk where they compete
compete for a pad at Cape Canaveral the
story pad 39a with they get into big
disputes and lawsuits over satellite
levels mus says if uh but I want Bezos
to succeed I want him to be driving us
into space because the more do it the
better I wish he would get out of his
hot tub and off his yacht more often so
that blue origin could be more
successful so that's not exactly a
compliment uh they don't hang out
together but I know that musk respects
Bezos Bezos once tried to
patent the concept of a self-landing a a
a booster rocket that could land upright
and be reused
which musk was already working on and
the idea that basos would try to patent
the idea went cause musk to go ballistic
but since then he hasn't gone ballistic
on Bezos and that got resolved how did
Steve Jobs change you I think that Steve
and all the people I've written about
caused me to think more about what's the
larger
Mission
and to care
about even things people couldn't see as
I said like the circuit board inside the
mac and you always know whether you're
cutting Corners when you're writing a
book doing a podcast starting a
company
and being honest with yourself about
that is you know I admire deeply Steve
Jobs's passion for beauty his passion
for the
product and all of them felt they
weren't trying to make the most money or
build the most valuable company although
they did Apple becomes that you know
Tesla becomes that they become the
richest people but they're doing it not
for a passion for profits but a passion
for the
product and specifically Elon spending
that time with
him yeah you know I I go back to the
know thyself
I can admire musk I can respect what he
does I also know it's the price he pays
for his success is a price that I think
is too high for me meaning I'm not going
to be that rough on the people around me
I've been married more than four almost
40 years and you know I care about this
balance of work and life and other
things mus doesn't care about that
so I
know that each of us has to decide how
do we do the
balances that make us feel the most
comfortable and I watch Elon and can
admire his
intensity but
also know the downsides of it and then
in a more complex way which is what the
book is
about understand how the
downsides and you said this at the very
beginning of the show The
downsides and bad traits are so
interwoven with the good
traits that you can't disentangle the
fabric the algorithm you write about in
the
book this five-step approach that Elon
takes towards sort of product
development when I read about it it kind
of just seems like more of the same Elon
which is like this sense of urgency
speeding things up and caring a lot
about the small stuff is that your
characterization of the algorithm and
what is the algorithm well the algorithm
goes back to what you called first
principles which is step one of the
algorithm is question every rule
question every requirement somebody says
we need to have a felt pad between the
battery and the chassis and you you say
why and they say well it's a regulation
or it's a rule and you say who made that
rule who made that does it really work
bring me the person the name of the
person who actually made it and let me
Grill that person to see if there's a
physics reason that has to happen and so
that's step one in the algorithm and
step two is uh Steve Jobs step which is
simplify even on the iPod when Steve
made it it's like I want to be able to
get to any song with only three clicks I
don't want a whole lot of buttons I
don't want a manual and they eventually
make the most beautiful simple thing
that comes the iPhone after a while
intuitive nobody has to read the manual
for how to use an iPhone
so step two is simplify then you speed
up the processes and final step is
automate and the problem must said is
when you try to automate processes that
you should have deleted you're not going
to do it but it's it's that just the
algorithm it's the algorithmic way of
thinking which is the manufacturing
matters as much as the design of the
product so he puts his engineers and
designers with their desk facing the
assembly L line so every hour they can
watch if there's a hold up if there's
something that's a a piece of you know
strip around the headlight or uh wiring
in the Raptor engine that's causing a
hold up in the manufacturing process the
engineers and designers can see it every
hour which is why he doesn't do what
most automakers now do which is send
something off and Outsource all the
manufacturing he's got to watch it
happen and people write he makes people
write their on the parts of the rocket
that they're responsible for yeah and
you got to it's like who's in charge
who's in charge of this valve and who's
in charge of the cost of this valve and
who's going to get this valve to be uh
cost down by
80% and if you don't think you can do it
your name is on that mission then step
aside you know we're not going to
tolerate people who can't be on the
mission a quick word on hu as you know
their respons sponsor of this podcast
and I'm an investor in the company it is
finally here 3 years of work from here
to try and make a bar a snack bar that
is nutritionally complete as of the
recording of this episode they finally
released these bars that are high in
protein 27 vitamins and minerals and
just 2 g of sugar The Impossible has
been done and it tastes so godamn good
often these snack bars these like high
protein snack bars taste like you're
eating Play-Doh or cardboard or
something it's so hard to make one that
is nutritionally complete and that
tastes good and ladies and gentlemen
here we have it I'm going to put the
link in the description to get your bar
below try it out and tag me and let me
know exactly how you get on because it's
so nice to finally have a bar that is
nutritionally complete and that actually
doesn't taste like cardboard and that
tastes
delicious The Impossible has been
accomplished you mentioned your own
family and your own um
relationships last question is about
elon's love
life you know now Elon loves drama and
turmoil right that's from childhood he
Associates it with childhood in love and
whether it's at Twitter or SpaceX or
Tesla he's always surging and wants
drama well for better or worse I would
say For Worse his emotional personal
love life tends to be that way he likes
drama and fighting and
intensity in his
relationships of the people he's been
with most have had this fiery intensity
to them from his first wife
Justine all the way through Amber herd
who I think's legendary uh in the
intensity shall we say of the
relationships and to some extent Grimes
now there been a couple of exceptions
one of whom I mentioned is tulula Riley
whom he was married to
uh English actress and she's great and
loving and calm and was a calming
influence and was the best thing to
happen to him in my opinion when it came
to
romance but he always valued the
intensity and
she rightly knew herself and said this
is amazing and I
really love everything happening but
this is not who I am I'm want to be back
in a more calm environment and
eventually she leaves and comes back to
England so with his own children his
lovers his wives there is the same
intensity that's baked into everything
he does but he seems to have a longing
to be with somebody he seems to be he's
always afraid of being alone he said
that he was so lonely as a child that
his biggest fear is being alone he
always loves having one of his children
I mean down at the rocket launch there's
Griffin there's X he was uh some he has
a
child uh who's autistic and you know
needs a minder generally I mean enough
so uh that he's still a very
wise uh teenager and even ask things
like why doesn't the future look like
the future dad which is one of the
things that Spurs Elon into making cyber
truck so
futuristic so he always likes having
some of his children around him he
always likes having a
companion but that doesn't mean he likes
calmness so interesting we have a
closing tradition on this podcast where
the last guest leaves a question for the
next guest not knowing who they're going
to be leaving the question
for and the question that's been left
for
you with all you know about the nature
of what it is to live a happy successful
life
what do you think is the single most
important characteristic to be happy and
or to be
successful knowing your mission and
knowing yourself I maybe that's two
things but it took me a while to know
myself meaning what I was good at as a
leader and what I didn't want to be good
at but also I know the mission that I'm
trying to do uh in life and it's not
getting Humanity to Mars is not the
grandest of all
missions but uh I
think if you know yourself and what you
value then the happiness
follows and what is your mission my
mission is that there's certain things
that Inspire us that make us aim higher
and make us
better and as a a journalist as a writer
and now as a biographer and historian I
like to tell the
stories about people who moved us who
rippled the surface of history and from
those lessons we all in a smaller way
can be on a journey that's not just
about
ourselves when I speak to my college
students there's always graduation
speakers that say follow your passion
and I say no it's not about your stupid
little passion it's about connecting
your passion to something higher than
yourself so figure out what that mission
is for you and I do it through
storytelling now storytelling isn't as
elevated as Rocket building or
automaking but it is the oldest most
venerable valuable way we have of
passing on values is telling stories
whether it's around the first campfire
ever built or whether it's Homer doing
it in the Odyssey or the Bible with a
great opening sentence in the beginning
comma telling us these stories I think
there's a role in society for
storytellers that try to make us
better well you have very much taken on
that role in a remarkable way I very
rarely pre-order or pre-save books ever
but based on the books you've written
previously this was one of the books
that I bought on both audiobook and both
physically and it far exceeded my
expectations because of the depth and
detail you go into these people this is
not a surface level from a distance
audit or analysis or deconstruction of
these individuals it is as if you are
living in their mind and writing from
the place of their mind mind and for
someone like me who I think of myself at
the start of my career that wants to do
great things yeah knowing everything
about these individuals that you've
covered allows me to pick and choose
elements that will get me closer towards
my
own version of happiness and success and
I think know thyself is such an
important thing when you read these
books because you have to assemble the
parts of an Elon or a Steve Jobs or a
Jennifer and take from them um to
complete your own little jigsaw piece
and we're all our own individual shapes
there'll probably never be a book ever
that comes close to the detailed in
depth of insight and understanding and
storytelling which is so unbelievably
captivating as this one that's written
on Elon Musk so it's um it's a must read
for everybody regardless of what
discipline or Pursuit you're in I think
it's just an absolute fascinating read
about trauma about Humanity about humans
and about what it takes to reach the
very top so Walter thank you for the
service to humanity that you've done by
the work that you do it's a huge honor
to get to meet you today wow it's a huge
honor to get to meet you and a actual
pleasure too thank
you quick one I discovered a product
which has changed my life called Eight
sleep this product eight sleep which are
a sponsor of this podcast has been a
revelation in my life because the eight
sleep pod cover which is basically a
fitted sheet that goes over your
mattress controls the temperature of
your bed throughout the night and it
follows Nature's natural Rhythm it
starts C gets colder while you go into
different phases of sleep and then heats
up slightly as you wake up in the
morning which is effectively guiding you
to have a deeper more restorative sleep
I genuinely think of all the things that
we would include in health and fitness I
think sleep now is the the most
important factor the thing that I'm
thinking about most often every single
day when I wake up in the morning the
first thing I do is I check my sleep and
I use that information to determine how
to proceed in that day how hard to work
out how many meetings to have what I
need to cancel what time I need to get
to bed so to celebrate them being a new
podcast sponsor I always want to get a
discount for you guys and I've got one
go to 8sleep.com which is EIG ghts
sleep.com
slst and if you do that you'll save a
$150 on the Pod cover that I have on my
bed the one I'm talking about grab your
pod cover send me a DM and let me know
how you get
on do you need a podcast to listen to
next we've discovered that people who
liked this episode also tend to
absolutely love another recent episode
we've done so I've linked that episode
in the description below I know you'll
enjoy
[Music]
it